# PODNAME: Seq
# ABSTRACT: What is Seq, and how do I use it?

__END__

=head1 NAME

Seq - A lazy sequence implementation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

A sequence is a generator for iterators. But you never use the iterators
directly. Instead you do operation on a sequence. A sequence don't
do anything immiadetely. It will wait with its computation until you
request values from it.

As a sequence generates iterators when needed. You always can execute a
sequence as often as you want. From its usage it looks like an immutable
iterator.

    # always represents the range from 1 to 100.
    my $range = Seq->range(1,100);

    # prints numbers 1 to 100
    $range->iter(sub($x) { print $x });

    # prints numbers 1 to 100 again ...
    $range->iter(sub($x) { print $x });

At the moment Documentation is lacking, but the source-code is well-documented
including the test-files. Maybe you want to look at the test-files until
I have written more documentation. The API is not fully stable at the moment.

    use v5.36;
    use Seq;

    # Fibonacci Generator
    my $fib =
        Seq->concat(
            Seq->wrap(1,1),
            Seq->unfold([1,1], sub($state) {
                my $next = $state->[0] + $state->[1];
                return $next, [$state->[1],$next];
            })
        );

    # prints: 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 233 377 610 987 1597 2584 4181 6765
    $fib->take(20)->iter(sub($x) {
        say $x;
    });

    # Represents all possible combinations
    # [[clubs => 7], [clubs => 8], [clubs => 9], ...]
    my $cards =
        Seq::cartesian(
            Seq->wrap(qw/clubs spades hearts diamond/),
            Seq->wrap(qw/7 8 9 10 B D K A/)
        );

    use Path::Tiny qw(path);
    # get the maximum id from test-files so far
    my $maximum_id =
        Seq
        ->wrap(   path('t')->children )
        ->map(    sub($x) { $x->basename })
        ->choose( sub($x) { $x =~ m/\A(\d+) .* \.t\z/xms ? $1 : undef } )
        ->max;

=head1 EXPORT

This modules does not export anything by default. But you can request the
following functions.

=head2 id

return its input as-is

    sub id($x) { return $x }

=head2 fst

return the first element of an array

    sub fst($array) { return $array->[0] }

=head2 snd

return the second element of an array

    sub snd($array) { return $array->[1] }

=head2 key

generates a function that picks a value from a hash.

    sub key($name) { sub($hash) { return $hash->{$name} } }

=head2 assign

allows you to assign a value, but also do a computation.

    my $value = assign {
        my $x = ...  # code to compute $x
        my $y = ...  # code to compute $y
        $x + $y;
    };

Same as

    my $value;
    {
        my $x = ...  # code to compute $x
        my $y = ...  # code to compute $y
        $value = $x + $y;
    }

=head1 CONSTRUCTORS

This module uses functional-programming as the main paradigm. Functions are
divided into constructors, methods and converters.

Constructor create a sequence. Methods operate on sequences and return
another new sequence. Converter transforms a sequence to some other data-type.

Methods are called methods for convenience, but no object-orientation is
involved. Perls OO capabilities are only used as a chaning mechanism.

Constructors must be called with the Package name. Functions that operate
on Sequences can either be called as a method or directly from the Package.

    my $range =
        Seq
        ->wrap(1,2,3)
        ->append(Seq->wrap(4,5,6));

or

    my $range =
        Seq::append(
            Seq->wrap(1,2,3),
            Seq->wrap(4,5,6),
        )

=head2 $seq = Seq->empty()

Returns an empty sequence. Useful as an initial state or as a starting point.

    Seq->empty->append( $another_seq )

=head2 $seq = Seq->range($start, $stop)

Returns a sequence from $start to $stop. Range can also be backwards. $start
and $stop are inclusive.

    Seq->range(1, 5); # 1,2,3,4,5
    Seq->range(5, 1); # 5,4,3,2,1
    Seq->range(1, 1); # 1

=head2 $seq = Seq->wrap(...)

Just takes whatever you pass it to, and puts it in a sequence. This should be
your primarily way to create a sequence with values.

    Seq->wrap(qw/Hello World/); # "Hello", "World"
    Seq->wrap(1 .. 10);         # AVOID this, use Seq->range(1, 10) instead.
    Seq->wrap(@array);

=head2 $seq = Seq->concat(@sequences)

Takes multiple *Sequences* and returns a single flattened sequence.

    # 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1
    Seq->concat(
        Seq->range(1, 5),
        Seq->range(5, 1),
    );

=head2 MISSING DOC

Implemented, but not documented yet:

from_sub, unfold, init, range_step, from_list, from_array, from_hash

=head1 METHODS

Implemented, but not documented yet:

append, map, bind, flatten cartesian, join, merge, select*, choose, mapi,
filter, take, skip, indexed, distinct, distinct_by, iter, do, rev

* will maybe change

=head1 CONVERTERS

Implemented, but not documented yet:

fold, reduce, first, last, to_array, to_list, count, sum, sum_by, min,
min_by, min_by_str, max, max_str, max_by, max_by_str, str_join, to_hash,
group_by, find


=head1 Github

Development project is on Github. L<https://github.com/DavidRaab/Seq>

=head1 AUTHOR

David Raab, C<< <davidraab83 at gmail.com> >>

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This software is Copyright (c) 2023 by David Raab.

This is free software, licensed under:

  The MIT (X11) License
