# PODNAME: Sq::Heap
# ABSTRACT: Heap

__END__

=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

Sq::Collection::Heap - Heap data-structure

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A Heap data-structure sometimes also called a Priority Queue is a data-structure
that can efficently insert and remove items into a bag and return the smallest
item.

Adding an element to the data-structure happens in O(log n) time as removing
an item for the data-structure also is O(log n) time.

A Heap is often used in traversing Graph algorithms, for example computing
shortest path with Dijkstra (or A* Pathfinding). In this case we usually need
to add some amount of items to a queue, then process the smallest element,
and while processing the smallest element it usually can add another bunch
of items.

A Heap is optimized for this kind of tasks as just using an Array, sorting
it again and again O(n * log n) time or doing single insertion sorts O(n)
usually performs a lot more worse.

This implemention is a binary Heap using an Array as a tree like data-structure.

=head1 USAGE

    # A heap that sorts its elements as numbers
    my $heap = Heap->new(sub($x,$y) { $x <=> $y });

    # Adds 10
    $heap->add(10);

    # Adds 3.
    # Its allowed to call all methods directly as functions
    Heap::add($heap, 3);

    # Adds many items at once
    # Each addition takes O(log n) time. so here it is 5 * O(log n)
    $heap->add(45, 30, 9, 1, 46);

    # head returns the smallest element without removing it. O(1)
    my $head = $heap->head();

    # remove returns the smallest element and removes it, causing the tree
    # to "balance" so it contains the next smallest element as first element
    # This is O(log n)
    my $smallest = $heap->remove();  # will be 1

    # remove_all returns all items from the internal data-structure at once.
    # after that opertaion the $heap is empty. Adding elements to a heap and
    # removing all elements is also called a Heap sort and works in O(n * log n)
    # timing like Merge Sort or Quick Sort. So it is one of the fastest sorting
    # algorithm but usually still slower as the other (because it needs to allocate
    # extra space). When all you need is to always sort all data at once, then
    # just use Perl's built-in sort.
    my @array = $heap->remove_all;
    my $array = $heap->remove_all;

=head1 CONSTRUCTOR

=head2 Heap->new($comparer)

You must pass a function that is used to decide which elements are greater/smaller.

Whenever the internal tree needs to be adjusted because an element was added
or removed than this function is called to compare two items and which is smaller.

It is expected that this function returns -1, 0 or 1. -1 should be returned if
the left item is smaller, 0 if both items are equal and otherwise 1 if the
right element is smaller.

Or instead of "smaller" consider it just as which item comes first. Usually
you just pass the exact same function here as you would pass to a sort()
function call.

If you wish for example to just get the greatest element, instead of the
smallest you just pass another comparision function.

=head1 METHODS

All methods can be called as a method C<< $heap->method >> or
directly as a function call C<< Heap::method($heap) >>.

=head2 count($heap)

returns the amount of elements in the Heap.

    my $count = $heap->count;

=head2 add($heap, @values)

adds one or multiple elements to the Heap.

    $heap->add("foo");
    $heap->add(qw/bar baz/);

=head2 add_one($heap, $x)

adds exactly one element to the Heap. C<add> is basically just a wrapper around
that function that calls this function in a loop, so you don't need todo that
if you need to add multiple elements at once.

Theoretically if you only need to add excatly one item you can call this function
and get a little performance boost. But usually this shouldn't matter much.

    $heap->add_one("foo");

=head2 head($heap)

Returns the smallest element (according to the comparison function) without
removing it from the data-structure.

    my $smallest = $heap->head;

=head2 remove($heap)

Returns and removes the smallest element (according to the comparision function).

    my $smallest = $heap->remove;

=head2 remove_all($heap)

Returns all removing elements at once in an array. This function is context
aware. It returns a list in list context and an array-ref in scalar context.

    my @array = $heap->remove_all;
    my $array = $heap->remove_all;

